How you doing?
Welcome back before the committee. Great to see you again.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, we are scheduled for the annual review of the New Zealand Antarctic Institute
this afternoon. We have half an hour set down for that.
Uh, we'll welcome some introduction and comments, and then I'm sure there'll be
plenty of questions. Um, particularly like to welcome Chair Leon
Grice and Chief Executive Dr. Jordy Hendryks.
Great to have you both with us in particular, and our wider support team as well.
Thank you for coming along. Over to you.
Thank you. Um, uh, we spoke for a bit longer last year, but we'll try and keep it
to three minutes so you have plenty of time for questions.
No problems.
Um, our board is very pleased with the progress we've made in the last year.
Uh, we exceeded our targets for supporting science in
Antarctica. We built new partnerships that are now increasing
science funding, which is good news for Antarctic science and the New Zealand
science community. Uh, we grew and strengthened international partnerships,
notably with the US, Korea, Italy, Germany, UAE, and
Switzerland. Uh, this means more logistics cooperation and more science.
And Jordy, Jordy can talk on these, uh, relationships later, if you'd
like. Next week, our board is poised to approve
develop/design, uh, for Scott Base redevelopment, which is
a penultimate step. The final step is to produce detailed design and a business
case with the support of our monitoring agencies to go to Cabinet in
mid-2026. Uh, our board has growing confidence
that we will deliver the development within the budget envelope and with much lower
delivery risk than before, and with limited compromise on the
delivery of the user requirements that were originally envisaged.
It's been a year of change with, uh, new board directors, a new chief executive in
Jordy, who was appointed earlier this year, and restructuring of the senior
leadership team, led by Jordy, to increase our efficiency and
focus. Uh, you have a very active board working for your
interests. Neville Harris chairs the committee to redevelop, uh, Scott
Base, and Neil Gilbert, Heather Simpson, Craig Allison serve on that
committee. Uh, Heather leads our People and Culture Committee, and Kerryn
Horn, uh, chairs our Audit and Risk Committee, and she's one of our, um,
more new members and we're very...
She's doing a fantastic job in charge of that committee.
We're currently standing up resources required with MFAT to establish a
philanthropic program that supports our mission in
Antarctica. Uh, we're very ambitious to continue to grow
international partnerships and increase our efforts to enhance New Zealand's
Antarctic science. As a recognized cryosphere scientist,
with Jordy leading our org- organization as chief executive, we're well,
uh, positioned to do this. As a board, we're now increasingly
focused on supporting our management team to refresh and strengthen our
corporate policies and systems, as well as continuously improve our
performance as a board. All these things matter because
Antarctica matters. It's not the bottom of the world, it's the central
engine driving our planet's oceanic and climate systems.
It's governed by a treaty with the central, central tenets of peace and science.
And in this system, New Zealand is a respected leader and peer, alongside
large and small powers. It's fundamental to New Zealand's interests and our
ability to influence global decisions today that will impact many
generations to come. We thank the New Zealand Defence
Force, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force personnel for their incredible support
in the most hostile oceans, skies, and land on the planet.
And they achieved some significant things in the last year down in
Antarctica. Um, we thank the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, our monitoring
agency and partner, and also Treasury and InfraComm, who assist in monitoring the
redevelopment of Scott Base. Then finally, our staff and families, many of who
are separated on Christmas Day. Uh, our staff lead on the international
stage, they keep people safe on the ice, and they've shown commitment to our
mission and resilience through the changes we've made through the last year.
Thank you, Mr., Mr. Chairman.
good. All right. We'll jump into questions.
I think we might start with the Scott Base redevelopment.
Um, interested in understanding a bit more around what's been
happening there over the last year since we had
the previous update. Um, obviously some good progress
around completing foundations for one of the turbines,
but unfortunately the damage to those turbine blades
in, uh, in transit. So interested in an update on that.
And also, obviously the disappointing
news around the liquidation for the contractor involved in that
project. So it'd be useful to get an update on how
that is tracking in terms of replacing that contract as
well.
It was, it was a very eventful project this year, and Jordy and I talked about it,
so Jordy can cover, uh, what we've done, uh, to deal with those issues.
Yeah, absolutely. Look, the, uh, the liquidation of EWT, a
turbine provider, uh, came as a real surprise.
These contracts were signed a number of years ago, uh, when they were entirely
solvent. Uh, the moment we got wind that the, uh,
EWT was in liquidation, we sent a team there.
Within 48 hours, we had a team in Amsterdam, uh, working with the
liquidator. And we were able, because of their efforts, to secure all of the
components we needed to ensure that the wind farm can proceed.
Uh, that was, uh... Treasury, at the time, said they were astounded
at the fact that we were able to do that with the liquidator.
Um, but we actually managed to secure all of those key components and have them in
hand and ready to go.
Excellent. Okay, and in terms of a replacement
contractor?
Yeah. So,
uh, certainly the plan was that they would also do the provision
and the install. Uh, and we are now working, we had an RFP out
to look for contractors that could install that equipment.
Uh, and, uh, we've had a number of interested parties there.
Uh, and they have experience with EWT.
Uh, and we have assurance that they are going to be able to install that, uh,
to the specifications we need. So, we have teams that understand the equipment, uh,
and we have teams that understand how to install them, uh, actually in a polar
environment. Some of the other work we've done is actually in the Arctic, uh, which
is not too dissimilar to the environments that we have in the Antarctic.
I think so. It'd be fair to say, just adding to what you were...
Sorry to interrupt. Um-
... uh, that by Christmas we think we'll have all of the technical expertise to be
able to run an energy grid on Ross Island.
Um, and so through the, the, the, the contracts that were put out for
tender. Um, so, a-and
I think what we've had to go through this year has led to, you know, modest
increases in the budget, which we will be able to accommodate within our overall
on-budget envelope redevelopment of Scott Base.
Okay. And so, you have engaged in, signed
contracts with all parties necessary to continue the
potential delivery of that project?
Tha- that's correct. We're actually, uh, to be completely accurate, we're in the
final stages of signing a contract with, uh, a electrical engineering
consultancy, uh, that has experience in connecting.
So, we have both the wind turbines as well as a, uh, battery
electric storage system, a BESS.
Mm-hmm.
So, basically a battery that'll store that excess power, uh, and then integrating
into both the New Zealand base and also the American base.
There's actually quite a lot of complexity around that, uh, and that's the piece
that we haven't quite signed, but we are very advanced in the conversations about
getting that right expertise on board.
So, you did have a contractor for that previously, correctly?
So, we, we had a, we had a one-stop shop solution, uh, and with that
liquidation, that's changed. So now, we have a new contractor that'll fill that
space for us-
Right.
... and support that integration.
Excellent.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chair. And, and again, on, on redevelopment Scott Base-
Yeah.
... and if we go back to... And I appreciate, um, Mr.
Chair was saying performance as a board is your focus, but, you know, we've had a
previous board, um, chaired by the current Public Service
Commissioner Sir Brian Roach, not without some ability.
The government's chosen him for a bigger role, uh, but we faced
cost escalations through that process.
How do we know that your board won't come back to government in another year
or two with another request for further funding?
Or indeed, how do we know that what you're proposing now is,
is, is good for 50 years of development and work
down in, in, uh
Certainly, the building that we'll, we- we've scoped out will, will be, um,
fit for purpose for 50 years, so 50-year life.
We did put the master plan together which was saying, look, rather than deal with
this once every 50 years, what can we do in 20 years' time, what can we do in 30
years' time? So, and I think that made a more sustainable approach
without compromising the user requirements.
But I think the question is about how does the board...
I think the first thing is the sub-committee has two expert, um, members
who are not board members. They are Warren Warfield and, uh, from
RCP, and, uh, Peter Leslie, who's a very experienced, uh,
marine engineer, uh, from Centerport previously and other, other
roles. So, we, we brought in the technical expertise, the, the raw
technical expertise that we needed at that board sub-committee.
Uh, and Neville Harris, who's delivered the Justice Precinct, very large,
um, public sector, uh, projects, is chairing the sub-committee.
I think that was a very strategic decision to, to, uh, for our
organization have someone with his experience.
And I, I think one of the other things that we did is, is we made
sure that, um, we didn't skimp on the best
expertise. And so, we've shifted from having, uh, built, become being the
developer itself to actually getting the external, uh, skills to be able to, to
manage it. Finally, I think the other thing too is, is that of the, the
budget that we're looking at at the moment, about $180 million
of what is there for us to spend, um, if
there's 498 million, we're spending 100 million, so of the
398 million left, about $190 million of
that is actual raw construction cost and $90 million is
contingency.
(coughs)
So, quite a conservative budget, and the contingency is needed because-
Yeah.
... if an icebreaker can't get through or breaks down and the ship can't get
through, and we lose a season, you know, the minimum raw cost
is 20 million. So, I think we've gone at this very conservatively.
Our design is very conservative in terms of the construction
materials, et cetera. So, there's...
we've moved away from sort of cutting-edge sort of technologies to
be able to, to, to deliver what we need to deliver.
I'm interested in the, uh, changes to the time frame as well.
So, uh, last year in the annual review,
um, we'd heard that you had just gone through the
master plan or were going through the master plan process, about to
approve it, I think, from memory, just after our meeting.
Yeah.
Um, and that you were anticipating having the detailed business
case to Cabinet, uh, in the second half of this year.
Yeah.
Mid this year. I see that's now pushed out to mid next
year.
Yeah.
Can you explain to us why that time frame has pushed out
so significantly?
Yeah, uh, do you want to pick that up?
Sure. So, look, uh, the, the new date that we've agreed to is, uh,
by the end of Q2 of next year, so, uh, April
25, uh, of '26 is what we're aiming for for that full
DBC. Uh, a big part of that is because we have had to go all the
way back to a master planning phase.
So, we went all the way back and made sure that any future investment doesn't have
any sort of sunk costs where you, you wish that you'd designed something that then
you didn't have to move on later on.
Um, so we've really gone back to sort of a, a, a, a new approach in terms
of where we're going. Uh, picking up on the previous comment about cost
blowout, one of the other big parts of this is that the new design is, is very
pragmatic, uh, in what we would think is prosaic, and in keeping with
how we build things in Antarctica, which is you build something that is
simple, that is robust, that is reliable, and fundamentally, you can fix down
there if there's a problem with it.
Uh, all of that gives us greater certainty around the pricing.
But in terms of that timeline, uh, we are now tracking well
for that timeline. Uh, we are at detailed, uh, design, sorry,
developed design right at the moment, and detailed design will drop in February.
Uh, and we're getting the cost assurance along the way.
So, we have confidence that we'll, uh, be ready for that, uh,
DBC in April.
The other element that, um, to that, uh, is,
uh, we went in to our monitoring agencies and to
ministers, um, for an early works contract, uh, this
year, um, and so LT McGinnis were
contracted. They haven't been contracted for the main build yet, uh, early
contractor engagement, but we gave them a contract for the early works this year
so that, uh, we're ready for the next year so that we kept...
... closer to the original timeframe of having it completed in '29,
'30. So, they are working at the moment down at Scott
Base, doing civil works for the site, uh, and also the, uh,
piling as well.
That's right. There'll be, there'll be some piling work at the end of this season.
There'll be, I believe, six test piles are being planned just to understand what
our, what our production rates are. So, how quickly can we do that?
Uh, how reliable are they? Uh, that'll give us more confidence heading into the
following season when we're doing the rest of the piling for that main base
building.
Yeah. It was quite a low risk decision for the, uh, ministers to make, um,
because the kinds of materials and the kinds of work that we were going to
do would be needed regardless whether or not the project was, was, was
feasible. Um, and, but also, we did take a sort of a
hint that there was growing confidence from MFAT and Professor Treasury
that we were on the right track, and to support us to the ministerial decision
to get it, a contract, uh, underway.
Mm-hmm.
Okay. Just want to come back to that timeframe piece though.
Um,
my understanding was that when we were here last year, you had
already gone through the master plan redesign at that phase.
And it was imminent and due for approval, um,
and we were told then that it would be late this year that we
would see the detailed business case.
So, what has changed between that point and now that has led to it
moving now to a Q2 next year?
Yeah, so I, I think the, the level of detail that we have in that business
case, uh, is obviously at a greater level at this point.
So-
Mm-hmm.
... we've gone through more work in terms of that planning, uh, and
also to be really clear around the, the, the buildability of that structure as
well. And I think it's one of these examples where if you look at large
infrastructure developments, there's a case of, uh, needing to walk
slowly at certain times and running at other times.
And we did this the right way around this time where we want to make sure that all
our planning, uh, and pre-planning is appropriate so that we can run when we hit
the ground and we have everything ready for the DBC.
So, I think it's just making sure that all those key elements are in place ahead of
time.
I think we probably underestimated a little bit too what our monitoring agencies
expected of us.
Okay. Um, we were s- trying to scope that and, and get that right, uh, at the time.
Mm-hmm.
Um, but the processes of getting their confidence back, I think is something that,
um... and quite rightly so I'm not being critical.
I think at that point when we were here last year, we were probably underestimating
that by a few months, which then takes us to quarter two.
Yeah.
Okay. And so sorry, back to your, um, point around the overall
delivery timeframe for completion of the project.
You still maintain confidence that you can achieve that?
Absolutely. Weather dependent.
Sure. Which is a fact though, I accept.
(laughs)
Okay. And then in terms of the wind farm itself, the delivery
timeframe for that piece of the project?
Yeah. The, uh, so the, the delivery on the
wind farm has been delayed because of this insolvency issue.
Uh, so we wanted to make sure that we didn't install effectively a
wind farm that was non-operational at that time.
It doesn't make sense in terms of having that up and running from a construction
standpoint to then not have it plugged in and, and functioning.
So we have delayed that to ensure that we can test how that whole grid will work
before we take it to Antarctica and before we plug it into that shared grid with
the, with the Americans. Uh, so that, I believe, has pushed back by
10 months. Uh, but at the same time, our program has also come
forward on the main build so that we are looking at a February of
2030 delivery on the main building base is our
timeline.
Okay. And timeline for the first turbine to be operational?
So the, um... let me double check
that. I don't want to misspeak here.
Uh, we will, we have a foundation in place right now that has now been set
and has re-frozen in, into that permafrost.
Uh, and my understanding is that that first turbine should be up next
season, uh, on the last program that I've seen.
Okay. Excellent. All right. Thank you.
Any other questions on the redevelopment? No? Okay.
More broadly?
Apart from that we hope next year we'll be
doing something. (laughs) Yeah?
Is,
You'll be in touch Mr.-
Can I, can I... I think it would be appropriate that select committee go down and
check out the piling.
(laughs)
(laughs) There's a, I believe there's still space on the vessel
taking piles down.
(laughs)
You go.
I'll be abandoned here.
You go, Jamie, and let us know how you get on.
(laughs)
In the, in the ship.
Yeah.
All right. Um, other questions? Okay.
Well, I'm, I'm keen to just get an update, um, on the joint logistics pool
site. Obviously there's been some commentary out of the US around what-
Mm.
... funding changes there may be in their system.
Don't expect your comments on that, but interested in your insights around what
impact that may potentially have or any, uh, conversations
you've had around potential impact?
Well, Geordie kept very close to National Science Foundations, so he should answer
this.
Yeah, absolutely. So, uh, I guess the first part of this is that the President
released a budget, uh, the US President released a budget that indicated
what his intent was for setting the tone.
Uh, that suggested that the, uh, NSF would, uh, see roughly a
50% cut in their budget, uh, from actually 60, about 9 billion down
to 3.9 billion. The President's budget is a request to
the House, uh, and the Senate. The House and the Senate then need to pass a, a
budget bill that comes through that's agreed on both sides, both parts of the
House. Uh, those are still in discussion.
Uh, what I can say is that both of those bills are currently showing
a, uh, a dollar value that's greater than 3.9 billion.
So they are arguing for more money for NSF, still a cut from the 9
billion, but not as drastic as what the President's budget has suggested.
Uh, so we are still watching to see what that final outcome will be.
Uh, another area where we've seen a direct impact, uh, or,
or have not seen an impact that people might have expected-...
was from this recent government shutdown.
Uh, the government shutdown, as you're aware, on the 1st of October.
It was shut down for 43 days. There was quite a lot of concern about what impact
that might have on our joint logistics pool.
Uh, the National Science Foundation had preemptively prepaid
all of their logistics costs for that first quarter to ensure that it
didn't, uh, impact the Antarctic operations.
So, what we're seeing there is that they are thinking ahead about how to not
impact a given season. Uh, in addition to that, just coming back to the
president's budget, while we don't know the outcome of that budget
cycle, when you look at the breakdown of the budget to
NSF, the logistics for the Antarctic and Arctic operations
are actually slightly higher. They're 0.5 higher in the president's
budget, whereas the science is getting cut by about 60%.
So what we're seeing there is that the president's budget recognizes the need to
maintain a, a logistics chain into Antarctica, and of course,
McMurdo serves as the hub for everything at the South Pole.
So everything that goes to the South Pole must come through McMurdo.
So, all in all, uh, we as an organization have confidence
that, uh, this remains a high priority to the US government, uh, and that
they understand the importance of maintaining a, a, a reliable logistics chain to
Antarctica.
You should talk about Catalyst and Minister Reti's announcement too.
Yeah, the other piece to that, uh, and certainly, uh, do
wanna understand that the budget is not settled yet on the US side, and that the
overall, uh, indication is, is probably less money for
science. Uh, one, uh, area that's, uh, very encouraging is
that we have just agreed to, uh, a new memoranda of
cooperation with the National Science Foundation.
This is the first cooperation agreement that New Zealand has had with the National
Science Foundation. It is focused on Antarctic science.
Uh, and, uh, to support that, we have also got some co-funding
from the National Science Foundation to match funding here in New Zealand for
US-New Zealand, uh, research in Antarctica.
So, while there is an overall downwards pressure on science funding,
this seems to be one area that is still, uh, shining bright, uh, in
both administrations, which is fantastic to see.
Yeah. Outstanding. Look, thank you.
I mean, um, we have, uh, uh, es- es- quite a good relationship with Horizon
Europe, and it's a new opportunity.
Is, is, is there any development in those areas of, of science
expansion?
Yeah. Ab- absolutely. Horizon Europe, I think is a, is a huge opportunity
for the New Zealand science community.
Uh, Horizon Europe runs by a, a sort of a call.
You need to have a call that you align your research to.
Uh, there is a rather large international, uh, consortium coming together
that's called InSync. So it's the synchronous observation, uh, of,
uh, uh, science in Antarctica basically, uh, where all countries will do
something simultaneously around the Antarctic region.
Uh, and that is likely to come up for a Horizons Europe call
in the near future. Uh, New Zealand is a new partner, uh, and as a
novel partner will be seen as a good member o- of part of a, a
consortium for Horizons money. So I think that's very ripe ground for our
community to, to, to dip into.
Laurence Meredith, the E- EU ambassador, um, uh, representative
here, um, you know, he pointed out recently that a,
a bid to the Horizon Fund that has New Zealand as a partner has a
40% increased chance of being funded.
Uh, and have you any projects that, um, you know, you're
looking to, to put forward?
Um, a- absolutely. I mean, there are a number of projects that would easily fit in.
It, it will depend a little bit on what that call will look like.
So there will have to be some tailoring of the specific projects.
Um, but to Leon's point, New Zealand has real expertise, uh, in a
number of areas of Antarctic science, where we are globally known as being experts
in that space. So if there's a way for us to demonstrate that and be part of
a consortium and really bring that extra value, I think it really puts
that grant at a, at a very high chance.
John, just on the National Science Foundation.
Mm.
I mean, um, it's good to hear that there's some money coming through, but, you
know, indications are from the US that they're kind of not interested in climate
change science. Um, and, and that might be a little
provocative-
Mm.
... but, but is there a shift in the focus, um, of that funding?
Because I know a lot of drilling, a lot of research is focused around the
climate and, and I guess the shifts in those areas.
Yeah, look, I mean, we can't speak to where their priorities are.
Uh, however, I can say that New Zealand's Antarctic science priorities do have
a, a central theme of climate change.
Uh, and of course, when we are working collaboratively, you need to have alignment
across both of those. Uh, the grants that have been funded to date,
uh, two of those, uh, do have a direct climate change application.
So while the administration may not want to go in that
direction, we're seeing that the decisions at the organizational level are still
supporting science in that space.
Mm. That's good to hear.
Excellent. Laura McClure.
Oh, um, thanks, Mr. Chair. Um, it was really encouraging to see that you didn't
have any major health and safety incidents.
It's finely iced in the report.
Um, so I don't know if you want to elaborate if there was any changes made or
whether it's just better luck this season, um, or if you
can point to any tangible differences that you might have made?
Yeah, look, I think we take health and safety extremely seriously.
We are operating in, uh, what's arguably the, the harshest continent
on the planet. Uh, we take people down, we take real pride in how we take care of
our people in Antarctica. That's both our employees, but also, uh,
the partner institutions that we have.
Uh, and I think it's really just a focus on health and safety across what we do.
We appreciate where we are. We know the consequences can be very severe in that
environment, so there really isn't an attitude of she'll be all right or we
can get away with this. And, and I think we, we do have a very high health and
safety standard across the organization.
Uh, of course, things do sometimes happen-
Mm.
... as they did last year and the previous year.
Mm-hmm.
Um, but we do set out for, uh, having the systems in place to
really reduce those to zero if possible, which, uh, we were
able to in this particular case, or at least zero notifi- notifiable
events at least.
I think as a board, we're not satisfied where we're at.
We want continuous improvement.
Um, and I think particularly h- as a board, how we improve
our sophistication, uh, in, in addressing health and
safety. Um, and so one of the things that we'll be doing in the near future is the
board having its own health and safety plan in terms of how it verifies and, and
supports the organization's health and safety.
I think we're very strong in terms of our commitment to culture.
I think in the area of symptom- systems, we just want to continue to improve, and
there's a lot of-
Mm-hmm.
I think we'll be looking to do some investment in that, um, in-
Yeah.
... in the current financial year.
Hm.
Thanks. Tammy, and I can't-
Look, thanks. Uh, in terms of your, um, cost pressures and cut cutters-
cut cutting, I'll, I'll be provocative.
I hope you're not looking to shift, uh, the manufacture of clothing and the
core support systems away from New Zealand.
So that currently takes place in Christchurch, I understand?
And that will continue?
Yeah, so we, we've, we've had a long term partnership with D'Arcy Sky, who have
provided our equipment, uh, that meet our needs.
Uh, equipment in Antarctica is, is more than just clothing that's nice
to wear.
Mm-hmm.
It's actually life-preserving.
Uh, so for us-
(laughs)
... there is no way that we want to be cutting corners, uh, just to reduce a few
dollars, uh, and certainly the, the quality that they bring, uh, and also
the lifecycle cost is actually really important.
You
know- Mm-hmm.
... the purchase price might be lower, uh, if you go elsewhere, but the lifecycle
would certainly not be, uh, and a number of the garments that we have as part of
our s- clothing, uh, stock, uh, continue to be used years after
years after years because they are so well-built.
And by using a cross-ish manufacturer, if a zipper breaks, if a button
pops, we can go back and get that repaired opposed to having to replace the
entire garment. You know, it's, it's a very deep relationship.
Great to hear, and, and, you know, it's been successful.
Can I just go, uh, in terms of the, the, the contracts going forward, and,
given the, you know, the, the squeeze on costs and, and legitimate kind of
oversight, um, a- are there plenty of opportunities
through procurement for good New Zealand companies to provide into
that project?
In, into the main construction and development?
Into the, into the redevelopment, yes.
Yeah, a- a- a- absolutely. There are some items, so it's, there are some long lead
items that we are procuring from overseas, uh, just because they have particular
specification. Um-
But there will be obviously opportunities for New Zealand companies to be a big
part of that build moving forward.
All right, thank you very much for coming in.
Let's
Really appreciate the opportunity to delve into some of the detail
today. Thank you again for the work you're doing down there on our
behalf. Uh, please extend that thanks to your team as well,
and we look forward to seeing you at the next opportunity.
Great. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
Thanks for the opportunity.
(microphone crackles)
All
right,
well,
good afternoon. Welcome
along, Minister, to our Annual Review Hearing, uh,
Week. It's been a thrilling week for all of us-
(laughs)
... in the Select Committee so far.
Uh, we're just about on the home straight, so really appreciate your time joining
us this afternoon-
Thank you, I look forward to it.
... uh, to talk through Customs, and of course, welcome Comptroller,
deputy, and wider team. We look forward to engaging with you, with the
Minister, and subsequent through the hearing for Customs and Border
Executive Board. So I'll hand over to you, Minister.
We have 30 minutes set down, uh, for this afternoon's session to welcome your
introductory comments, and then there'll be questions from members.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I will make just a brief, um, com- uh,
comment to start with. Um, they're just around some key areas that
Customs has helped protect and promote New Zealand's interests over the past
year. Uh, Customs continues to provide New
Zealand's economic interests and promote New Zealand's
economic interests and support trade that involves working with the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs in trade to support negotiations on free trade
agreements such as the FTA concluded in record time with the
United Arab Emirates and a new bilateral mutual recognition, uh,
arrangement signed with India to provide easier and faster
clearance into this important market.
I'm pleased to report the 2025 time release study confirms that
Customs is clearing more than 98% of import and export
transactions within five minutes of lodgment.
Overall, freight volumes have risen with Customs processing nearly 32
million import transactions in 2024-'25.
That's a 16%, um, more than previous year.
There were four million export transactions, around the same level of
activity in 2023 and '24. Importantly, Customs
collected 17.8 billion in revenue for the
2024-'25 period, up from 17.4 billion in the
previous year. And along with facilitating trade and the
flow of people and goods, Customs protects New Zealand from illicit
trade. This past year has followed recent trends with Customs
seizing increasing amounts of illicit drugs and seizures happening
almost daily. Over the past financial year, Customs and its
international partners stopped more than nine tons of illegal drugs
and cut off hundreds of millions of dollars of criminal profit.
As Customs ministers, I've said many times, we are confronting
huge global criminal networks that are determined to make money
here. This was confirmed by the Ministerial Advisory Group I established to
advise on how, on our response to the massive harm
transnational s- serious organized crime is causing in our
communities. I'm sure we'll talk further about this, but part of the government
response's work, uh, is currently underway on border
security legislation to update and strengthen Customs'
mandate.The Border Security Bill intends to enhance enforcement
powers and information sharing, and it also strengthens
regulations to ensure the security of Customs-controlled areas and
toughen our borders. Another area of increased criminal activity is
illicit tobacco. Customs Fraud and Prohibit- Prohibition
Team continues to encounter significant criminal activity with
illicit tobacco, seizing more than nine tonnes over the past financial
year. Um, to conclude, I really would sincerely want to acknowledge the
outstanding services at Customs Delivers, and most
importantly, the incredible dedication of their staff.
And I'm happy to take questions.
Excellent. All right. Thank you for that.
First question from the Honourable Jenny Salesa.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. And can I begin by thanking, um,
Christine and all of our Customs staff?
I see there's 1,400 or so, um, that work in
Customs. I know that all of you work extremely hard to protect,
um, our borders. Uh, Minister, as, as you just, um,
said in your statement, the Annual, uh, Report
2025, uh, Customs actually stopped or prevented
9.3 tonnes of illegal drugs, uh, from coming through to
Aotearoa New Zealand. However, our wastewater data
shows that methamphetamine consumption, um, has
doubled for some of our regions. Uh, so do you
accept that the seizure-focused strategy,
um, is failing to reduce the actual supply of
illegal drugs, um, to our New Zealand communities and New Zealand
families?
Um, no, I don't suggest that it's failing.
I, I think there is a lot more we can do.
If you look at the proportion of consumption based upon that wastewater result
versus what is being seized, we are seeing, you know, a
massive, you know, um, differential between how much we're seizing
and actually how much is being consumed in the domestic market.
Encouragingly, we have seen a slight dip, um, although that's
not nearly as much as we saw the increase from July 2024.
So that's the reason why we set up the ministerial advisory group, and there
has been a significant gear shift in Customs activity as well.
It's also part of why the Border Security Bill has become so important to
strengthen that activity, um, and also our international
relationships. I think one of the big components we're dealing with is
that, that we are an incredibly lucrative market for
methamphetamine. Um, you know, our, our domestic cost,
um, price for methamphetamine here is, um,
one of the highest in the world. So we are very profitable and therefore we're a
very attractive market. So we are now at the process which
is what the advisory group see it as, what are all the levers we can pull?
Um, so yes, it's not just a seizure approach.
There has to be more we can do in this space.
Um, and you know, that has, um, been reflected in last year's budget.
We did see an increase in, in, um, resourcing for Customs
to do that gear change.
It's good to see, um, Minister, that there is, you know, in your
MAG Advisory Group support, there is beginning to be a dip, especially in,
um, meth consumption. However, um, what our
wastewater, uh, data tells us is that consumption
of illicit drugs, especially meth, is still quite high.
Uh, which means that Customs is not actually stopping
enough of the illegal drugs at the border.
So do you accept that under your watch, our
border has become more porous, easier for transnational organized
crime, uh, groups to bring through illegal drugs to New Zealand?
No, I don't accept that. I do accept that we have a very supply-driven
market. So there has been a huge amount of innovation as to how
they are penetrating our border. So that is a big
issue. We also don't know how much is...
if you consider the methamphetamine market, and this is what we're analyzing
very closely, when you consider the methamphetamine market is driven by
large cartels who operate like businesses.
So we still don't know how much is, um, in relation to a stockpiled
market, how much was already here versus how much is being released into the
market now. Um, price differentials, how the price has
changed. So we know that there is more we
can do and that's what all of this work is about.
But I wouldn't accept that this is a failure on any
agency to do what at the very best it can do.
We are ver- dealing with very, very, um, sophisticated
operators and this is why we're seeing, um, you know, this is
coming through, you know, the airports in small packages, through couriers.
We're seeing it coming through the mail.
We're seeing it coming through the borders and we're seeing...
we're stopping it in all of these points.
Um, but there is more we can do and the first part we can do
is dismantle the organized crime networks that are driving
it.
Supplementary.
Thank you.
Mr. Fernandez.
Um,
forgive me if this is a ignorant question, but is there any estimates of
what portion, um, of the New Zealand
consumption of, um, you know, meth and illegal drugs are
supplied, uh, through the border and what proportion is manufactured,
uh, domestically here?
Uh, I'm not sure of the exact proportions, but very little is manufactured
still in New Zealand. It's just, it's so cheap to
obtain through, um, you know, massive production markets in,
in, in the foreign environment. Um, so we're seeing very little
domestically produced, um, if any at all.
Okay.
That, that whole clan lab environment really doesn't exist anymore.
Yeah. Okay. So it's all basically coming from overseas.
Yeah, yeah.
Can you give us some insights, Minister, on some of the work that's being done
by Customs, uh, in conjunction with other agencies as
well to stop some of these drugs coming through?
And, you know, you talk about the increasingly innovative and sophisticated ways
that drugs are being smuggled. Can you give us some insight-...
around the, um, I guess, confiscations that have happened.
Yeah, so some of the ef- effectiveness, and I think, you know, um,
don't want to steal the limelight but, you know, this is their work.
But one of the key, um,
tools that Customs is using really effectively is the international
relationships, those relationships with our foreign partners, um,
using intelligence. A lot of their seizures and almost
half of what we seize here is actually stopped before it gets
to us. So, that's really reliant on those international
relationships and that cooperative relationship building, that intelligence
sharing framework, which has been really effective.
Um, the other component is, you know, for example, the new mail center that was
opened, um, that using data for mail, um,
analyzing that, um, data before it gets here, like
understanding who's, what's coming through and being able to do a lot more
proactive interceptions in the mail center.
Uh, the other program that has been working very effectively is the team that was
stood up at the Auckland Airport. Um, that is, we've seen a massive
increase in the, in the couriers that are being stopped, um, as they
try and bring, um, smaller quantities.
But still, you know, we're talking 20, 30, 40 kilogram suitcases that
are, are being brought in. That's through unaccompanied baggage as well as
couriers. So there's, um, that proactive
environment. Um, the other part is that the,
um, um, cooperation relationship with Defense, um,
that was our uncrewed surface vessels that have been,
um, deployed and we're working on that, the effectiveness of that.
The other thing is just the maritime work which is, you know, using technology
to analyze activity in the water, um, and,
um, seeing boats, um, and their movements so we know what's coming
at us. Um, and on, at a very, um, operational
level, the way Customs works incredibly closely with
police, um, that cooperation is, and we've seen, um,
the recent media report you would have seen was the, the Steel Girder operation,
which was, um, a huge quantity, over half a ton
of, of methamphetamine, and that was a very sophisticated operation
that was a longstanding sort of surveillance program with Customs and police.
It was really, uh, uh, um, a, um, you know, a,
a pretty world-class operation in terms of how we managed to intercept
and get the offenders at the same time. So, um, and they're just some examples.
I mean, I'm sure Customs could fill, fill a whole hour with that.
(laughs) Excellent. All right. Honorable Jenny Salesa.
Um, Minister, the 2025 annual report also showed that
Customs missed two of its, um... It didn't actually
reach 100% in terms of target external alerts.
Can you just guarantee that the two that were missed in terms of the
alerts did not result in either high-risk individuals or illicit drugs
or illicit goods coming through the border?
I'm sorry, just have to check with the-
I can, I can confirm that, yes, that there weren't high-risk, uh, travelers.
Uh, one of them was missed on their way out, was caught on the way back in, and
that was just to capture some details like an address.
So it wasn't, uh, it wasn't, uh, to, uh, prevent a- an
offender leaving New Zealand.
So, it was okay that they went through.
The Customs-
So, so, not okay-
... person, didn't actually refer the person to the police and for one of them,
um, but the police wasn't actually alerted until two days later.
Correct. So it's not okay. Uh, but in the scale of 1,800 alerts that we
can't have managed, there was two that we missed.
Um, not okay but you asked the question about whether they were high risk.
They were not high risk. That individual flew back into New Zealand, was referred
to police. And that was just to find out their address details, et cetera,
rather than to arrest or anything like that.
So we would consider that slightly slower-
Is that usual though, that people are missed like that, that could be-
No, it's not. That's why it's only two alerts, uh, um, that we haven't missed out
of 1,800, I think 77.
Okay. Any further questions for the Minister?
Um, any supplementary-
Yeah, Francisco Hernandez.
Uh, thank you, Chair. Um, Minister, the annual report, and you referred to it
in, um, one of your earlier answers, makes a reference to cooperating with
our international partners to share intelligence.
It also makes reference to, um, joint operations.
Does the international partners we work with include, uh, the
US Immigration and Customs Enforcement?
Yes, we do have a, um, a relationship with the US.
They're quite an important partner in terms of, um-
Yeah. ... both facilitating trade as well as intelligence sharing.
Yeah. Does the, um, does the newly, um, upgr-
uh, does the enhanced presence of, um, the FBI
in Wellington, does that facilitate the increased cooperation that
we have or is that unrelated to the Customs function?
I'm not sure there's any direct relationship with FBI here in New Zealand, that our
relationships are through the border-
Right.
... um, from a Customs perspective.
Cool. Um, with our national and international partners, have
there been boots on the ground, uh, from them when we're conduct- when
we're conducting joint operations in New Zealand or our territorial waters?
No. So there, there has... We have, I think, there has been
historically, um, some connection with the French when we've
done an operation in the Pacific, um, through their relationship with New
Caledonia. That's, they-
Right. ... they have assisted. Um, but no, there...
So,
border sovereignty still remains critical.
This is about information sharing and as much as we can get
people, um, get illicit drugs and
product stopped before it gets here, that's the priority of those
relationships. But Customs also has a trade relationship
so we have, I think, 14, um, overseas postings
across 10 countries. Um, and they, a big part of their
roles is actually in the trade facilitation and, um, the trade
relationships. Uh, but those, um, sharing of intelligence are also important
relationships.
So the primary function is, I guess, intelligence sharing rather than-
Yeah. ... sort of operational level assistance?
Yeah.
Honorable Janice Lisa.
Minister, one of the things, many things that, uh, came out of the MAG
reports, uh, through to you was the fact that quite a lot of
these illegal drugs and transnational organized syndicates are coming
through the Pacific, and corruption was actually one of the things
that, uh, the report also note, noted.
How is New Zealand Customs working to ensure that
those routes are actually not as strong coming through the Pacific?
First question. And supplementary to that, what
is, uh, it that Customs and you are doing in terms of
assisting, um, with, you know, the
corruption that's happening in the Pacific?
Um, there's actually really good work and I, you know, just recognize the team that
are in the room today. There is the leadership development program where Customs
actually delivers training programs to key staff in, in the
Pacific. Um, I think, um, Joe Cannon's off to a
graduation in Suva, um, shortly. So we do a lot of that
building res- building capability.
Um, also work with the Pacific around developing their customs and exercise
legislation to ensure that they are optimizing the revenue
collection opportunities, so, you know, supporting their economy.
We have the, um, Pacific Drug Dog, Dog Detector
Program. Um, so we just announced recently that there was some a- additional
funding going into Tonga to build an additional kennel in Vava'u.
So it's, um, those sort of practical on the ground tools as well
as, um, supporting, um... You know, we have a, um, a
liaison role that travels the Pacifics significantly.
Um, I think one of the biggest things for the Pacific is to
support their economic viability.
So I think that's where the trade training, um, work that Customs does
with, um, you know, ensuring that they have the ability
to optimize their opportunity to, um, collect
revenue and excise and, and be effective in that space.
But leadership development is a key component of that as well.
Um, and ensuring we have a presence.
I think every time New Zealand is, um, engaging with the
Pacific is an opportunity to strengthen those relationships and, and
build that, um, connection, um, and sharing of
intelligence is another component.
Um, Customs recently had an operation with the blue bottles, um, the uncrewed
surface vessels up in Fiji. So those practical things as well around
how we broaden our border to incorporate the Pacific,
um, and, um, understanding their needs as well to support it.
So there is a few components, um, and of course the police also have,
um, functions to play in that space as well.
Can I just bring it back through to Aotearoa New Zealand though?
Um, one of the things that came through a lot of those reports that MAG did for
you is intimidation, violence and
bribery and corruption is also happening here in Aotearoa.
Mm-hmm.
Um, what is it that Customs is doing now that's different
to ensure that
that is actually addressed on the ground here?
Within the Customs team or across the (overlapping dialogue)
At, within the Customs team and then what, what work are you doing broader?
Because, you know, you're the ones that
are there to oversee that illi- especially illegal drugs is not coming through.
I, I, I think that's the part is, um, the, the intelligence sharing
component, but it's that, you know, when, when there is,
um, commercial drivers of making money, which is the way you
corrupt, way, way you can be corrup-...
One of the easiest ways to be corrupted is that, is to ensure that there
is, um, leadership development is, that's how
you, you know... It's not about the detecting the corruption, it's about deterring
the corruption. So that leadership development thing I think is quite a key
component. Um, Customs has its own processes around integrity
development and, um, that, you know, reporting process and all of
the, um, training that's delivered to its internal team.
Um, but this is the, um, recognition of, you know, for example, the
work that has been done with baggage handlers at Auckland Airport that has
large... that is absolutely being driven from an internal
corruption, um, you know, integrity point of view.
And that was that why that work has been so effective, but it's
actually having, you know, boots on the ground has, has delivered that real impact,
is actually seeing uniforms on the ground does have an impact and
does, um, create some, um, deterrent.
And that factor is, uh, is actually having a presence.
So I think those are, are collective things.
It's not a, a quick answer, it's an ongoing challenge.
Um, and that's where I think that closer our relationships are, the more we
engage, the stronger that they, they, the more resilience they will have to
corruption as well. I, I would note, and I've, I'm not sure if it's been your
experience, but I would note the engagement has been really positive and I
think, you know, the Pacific is reaching out and that those relationships
have been really positive, I think, um, at all levels of not just at a government
level, but at a operational level, the, that engagement's really
close and positive. So, um, a real good credit to the Customs team around
how they build those relationships.
Just a question about staff and only because others aren't asking
questions. Um, can you explain how cutting 79
experienced staff, um, and then hiring 60 new
staff, but that's over a period of four years, represents
strengthening our border workforce?
I think it's really important for an organization like Customs to have the
flexibility to ensure that they've got the right people in the right places doing
the right jobs. And, and I think, you know, one of the examples
that comes up a lot is, um, you know, there was a, there was a,
a training, a dog training position that was turned into an operational handler
position. There were staff, um, disestablished that were working in
sole state-
Yeah.
... you know, sole, um, lone worker positions, um, redeployed to
other positions. So, I think it's the practicality of ensuring that your
workforce is continuing to deliver, um, what is needed, where
it's needed, and, and those processes, um, not only
about, you know, ensuring that people are in the right place, um, but that they
are doing the right job. And in this environment
where, um, technology changes, demand changes, threats
change, I think, um, the, the process Customs went through was
very robust and the, the structure that's in place now I think is very
strong.
Just supplementary to that though, how do you ensure that the
institutional knowledge of really experienced Customs
senior people are retained, especially as we're talking about
dismantling transnational organized criminal syndicates?
I, I think Customs has a very good system of retaining intellectual
property. They, you know, their, their process is.
But also, they have retained, um, you know, I've, I've been to their awards
ceremony this year, year end. I think I've given out three or four 50 Year Service
Medals. So, I think they have retained that, um, skill and
capability. And, um, you know, I, I have no discomfort at all
in the fact that they have retained the, the skill they need to keep the
organization going.
Minister, can I follow up on that? I, um, had the privilege of being at
the, uh, Intelligence Industry
Association Awards again this year and, and the last couple years.
And, and, and at those, uh, it's been really cool hearing some of the
stories from Customs personnel who've been nominated for awards or received awards,
and some of the work that's going on to tackle some of those in- issues like
transnational organized crime, um, protecting our borders, keeping us
safe. I'm, I'm just wondering how ...
Do you have any reflections on, um, some of those
achievements of the Customs team from the last year, and
some of those great wins that we hear? Some of them are really public.
We hear about when there's a big bust in the Pacific, and the navy ship comes in
and it's part of it. But the thing I've noticed is the number of people
that are working around ways that you— that most of us would never know about.
And often for good reason, but often because they just get up in the morning, they
put on the uniform, they go to work, and they do a great job.
I'm just wondering what, what your reflections are on that.
Yeah. I, I think one of the ones I reflect on is a very new Customs
office, uh, that was, um, stationed at one of the ports and,
um, stopped someone leaving, walking out of the port with a
large quantity of cocaine on 'em, um, and you know, that was a ...
He was, I think, three weeks in the job, I think, bre- from my
recollection.
Ah, wow.
Um, so, you know, that's that kind of, um, that dedication
factor. And then, things that, you know, the, the, we talk a lot about
the achievement of the, um, online traveler declaration form.
Um, someone in this room was, um, responsible for driving that project, and that
was driven from internally from Customs, building that technology and capability.
Yeah.
Um, and that's another tool that's allowed us.
It was recently used, um, to proactively communicate
information, so around the measles outbreak.
Um, it, it was a online tool that's been able to communicate with passengers
very effectively, very quickly. Um, so those sort of technology
things that are being achieved. Um, I was out on the maritime unit, um,
and they were building their own, um, Bluetooth camera, um,
solution to look, you know, search boats and, and then that built into
a, an- another bigger solution. So, their, not only their
dedication, but their innovation is, is really impressive,
um, with a really common goal. And I think that's, um, to be applauded.
Mm-hmm. All right, supplementary, Francisco Hernandez.
Uh, yeah, thank you, Chair. Um, my question was around, um,
the new staff that was, um, that was being heard from the
additional investments that were made.
Um, what percentage of those were, um, redeployed from, from roles that had
been disestablished?
Um, oh, that's pretty operational, I'm not sure on though.
Uh, we held, uh, a number of vacancies through our restructuring period
so that we could place as many of our existing people as possible.
Um, for the new roles, generally speaking, um, actually
it's a mix and I don't have a, a proportion for you, but we can get that.
But it's a posting question.
Another group who were internally promoted-
Yeah.
... which is, which is actually a strong preference I have because they're your own
people, you know them-
Yeah.
... you know their skills. But I think another strength of Customs i- is we do also
bring in people at, as lateral hires.
So, by that I mean we bring them in at all levels.
We don't just bring them in at, um, entry-level Customs
officer role.
Right.
We bring them in at different positions.
And some of those positions, people from other organizations in New
Zealand can do them. Some of them are technology positions or data analytics
positions, and those skills exist in the wider workforce.
Uh, sometimes people come to us from defense or the intelligence community.
That's not at all uncommon. So, yeah.
Very good. Honorable Janice Lisa.
Uh, Minister, why is the funding for the New Zealand Traveler Declaration
being deemed complete and reduced when the system actually didn't
meet the target that you set yourselves of, uh, 70%?
Are you abandoning the actual target or just the funding to achieve it?
No, I, I, the, what it was to do, and I'm, uh, the controller might correct me, but
it was the development of the system-
Mm-hmm.
... and the rollout of the system and its development.
Um, the target is, um, one of these ones that we've angst
over around, um,
coercion versus compulsion sort of, um, uh,
uh, challenges, which is we're trying to get more and more
passengers to get over that 70% threshold.
Um, we do on occasion, um, get it over that
threshold, um, but it's still a, a, a growth process.
But, um, the, the alternative is we take
paper off all of the airplanes. Then the risk is that you slo- you could
potentially slow down people's arrivals and impact their
visitor experience. So, um, Customs is continue to work with
this, working with airlines, working with, um, the process to
encourage people. So, we're not, definitely not abandoning the target.
Um, now it's not so much the investment, it's more about
the, um, getting people into the habit of using the
system, um, and I'm confident by the end of summer-
Can I jump in, Minister?
Yeah. (laughs)
Um, I am very disappointed we haven't made the target regularly.
Uh, uh, Jamie and the others will tell you what a pain in the neck I am.
We are me- we are hitting 70%, 72% actually reasonably
regularly. What I can tell you is we, uh, we
break down the usage. Uh, interestingly to me, New
Zealanders fill it out about, about 70% of New Zealand passport
holders will complete it crossing the border.But
75% of Australian passport holders complete it and they don't even
have a digital declaration in Australia.
So, um, whether New Zealanders are just a bit more relaxed about coming home
and don't think that-
(laughs)
... (laughs) don't think we're going to make their life more difficult, I don't
quite know. Um, we have worked endlessly with, uh,
airlines. Um, they've been very good.
Uh, you may notice MPI have just put out a new biosecurity video, which
will be on planes this week, and there's a whole new section on the
digital arrival, um, declaration. So that's, that's very good.
They're absolutely supporting us in this.
Um, uh, actually, the minister was there.
We, we hosted the Five Eyes heads of Customs in New Zealand couple of weeks
ago and my colleague who runs Canada Border Services
Agency was saying, uh, they've had theirs since
2019 and they feel it's a good day when they hit
40%. So, I think that's kind of interesting.
We have had a paper card since 1921.
It, I think it takes people perhaps a while to shift.
But we are not giving up. Um, we've got some thoughts
about what we will do once we're out of the busy summer period this
year. Uh, but any assistance any of you can give
us, I hope you're all filling it out. Tell your family, tell your friends.
Uh-
I can vouch for the fact that it's so efficient and so much faster to do it
electronically on your phone than to fill that 1000
page paper. Well, because the feedback... I know, the feedback we get is just universally and
uniformly positive. Um, the number of people who ring the contact
center is, uh, sort of two or three a week.
You know, it is a very good tool so we will just keep pushing
it.
Very good. All right then-
Just one last question.
Mm-hmm.
You know, the very last report that you have, um-
... where do you see... When is it going to be in, uh, the recommendations for the
report, the MAG report? You know-
Um-
... with the new minister and all of that, when is it going through to Cabinet?
When will
Yeah, we're-
... recommendations come through?
Very soon. Um, we're, uh, working through it.
It's, it is a, um, it's been a busy time, um, but it remains a
priority for me to, to get as many recommendations as we
can. And there's the Transnational Serious Organised Crime Strategy which will
be released shortly and so, um, we'll work through our program
related to that.
Supplementary to that, is that actually, um-
All right, that's us for the afternoon. Thank you very much, Minister.
Thank
Appreciate your time coming along to join us for the session, and
we'll carry on with, uh, Customs so we can follow those questions
through, uh...
It was only to ask, is the TSOC-
Wow.
... replacing the TNIC.
Oh, yes.
Sorry, it was in a tricky position. Thank you, Robert.
Yeah, okay.
Good. All right. Welcome along again.
Thank you.
Uh, I'd like to hand over to you, Comptroller, for some opening comments and then
we'll continue with, uh, the questioning we had or other questions as well, I'm
sure.
Thank you. I'll make my remarks brief but good afternoon and thank you for the
opportunity to appear at the annual review
Customs. It has been a busy year and you have already touched on
many of the areas of the full work program, uh, but if I may, I'll just add some
brief comments. I'd like to start by paying tribute to the Customs people,
my people. Their professionalism, dedication and commitment to service
are fundamental to border protection, the collection of Crown revenue,
and the efficient processing of trade and travelers.
These activities support New Zealand's best interests every day.
I'm very proud of their hard work and successes and I thank them for what they do
in the service of New Zealanders. But as we've touched on, the environment our
people are operating in now, particularly in investigation and enforcement
operations, is deteriorating as the risks of dealing with
transnational serious and organised criminals increase.
One of the things we have done is co- conducted a comprehensive review of our
recruitment and training. Our objectives are to ensure we bring in the
right people and equip them to the highest standard we can with the right
skills, knowledge and tools for our current and likely future
environments. Our training in future will incorporate the changes
which will flow from the decisions concerning the Border Security Bill which the
minister touched on.
In other areas, we're continuing to extensively, uh, modernize our
border. This program includes updo- excuse me, upgrading
e-gates in all the international airports, uh, at Auckland,
Wellington, Christchurch and Queenstown and installing new biometric
capability in the manual processing routes.
Uh, we've talked a little bit about the New Zealand traveler declaration.
Um, and we are touching 70% regularly, just not every
day. I have to say, uh, Jamie and I both enjoy summer because cruise ship
passengers, almost 100% of them fill it out, which is
great. Uh, our border system modernisation program will give us
greater capabilities on the platforms we use to risk assess and process travelers
and goods. And we have just introduced new advanced substance
identification equipment at our key ports, airports and our cargo
inspection sites. We have got a tariff modernisation
program underway. This is a very major piece of work to move the
paper-based working tariff document, which if you've seen it, it's literally a book
like this, uh, onto an online digital system.
Being able to use and update tariff codes digitally rather than
manually will provide significant efficiencies for Customs, but more
especially for New Zealand businesses.
And this in turn will contribute to us keeping our costs down and making
accuracy and cli- compliance even easier for
business. This is the last time the Border Executive Board will be
under annual review at this committee as it moves from being an inter-
departmental executive board to a cross-agency sector leadership
group. I'd like to acknowledge the work of the Border Executive Board and the
Secretariat over the past five years, as well as thanking my fellow
BEB chief executives and their agencies for their efforts on joint border
matters over that time. Thank you.
Excellent. All right. Thank you. We will, uh, jump into questions.
The Honourable Jenny Salesa.
Not so much a question actually. It's really just to acknowledge you,
Christine, um, for chairing this Border Executive
Board. You were established in January of 2021 during
really difficult period of COVID and you were brought together as
a board for that reason, right? To assist the government at
that time with ensuring that, um, those risks don't come
through, uh, the border. So a lot of work in, in
leading the group and chairing all of those, um, other chief executives.
So-Thank you for such a long and challe-
you know, all the challenging work that you've had to face.
Um, and I see some of the work that you've actually done and
led, um, as a board. Um, the Digital Border
Program, definitely something that all of New Zealanders are grateful for.
Thank you so much for that. Um,
but what are, in your words, what are the main things that your
board did, and what, I suppose, could the new, uh,
group... I- I- I forget what the new group is, Cross-Border
Agency Group-
Leadership group, yes.
What, what could they learn from the work that you have done as a, a border
executive?
Uh, there's a lot to be proud of. I think, um, just to go back a little
bit, border agencies have always worked closely together.
You know, we literally work shoulder-to-shoulder with our colleagues from
Biosecurity New Zealand, MPI, Immigration New Zealand, and often
Health, MFAT, and Transport. Um, but as
you will remember I'm sure, uh, the need to have
tighter integration of those functions through the COVID period, um, was the
reason the BEB was set up. Uh,
chief executives through that period were meeting at least weekly, if not more
often, and we worked our way through all manner of things.
Um, opening red zones, uh, ensuring our staff stay-
stayed safe, because at that point COVID, of course, was crossing the border, and
our staff were, uh, were, um,
you know, they, they interacted with all of the people coming into the country, and
that was the only vector for COVID for quite a period.
Uh,
the work we did eventually on vaccines and testing of
people across not only public service border agencies, but people who worked in
airports and ports, air crew, all of that, huge amounts of work.
And then when we reconnected with New Zealand, I think opening
t- turned out to be much harder than closing, frankly.
And that was a, that was a mammoth piece of work, which again, border agencies all
had to contribute to. Uh, the New Zealand travel declaration
came out of a lot of that work, and I'm really proud of that.
And that, as the Minister mentioned, benefits several of
us, uh, all the time. Um, to have advanced
information about passengers is really important for us.
It gives us the opportunity to, to, uh, see who's
coming, see what we know about them, and be ready to,
um, uh, react when they arrive in New Zealand.
Or actually, in the case of Immigration New Zealand, not board passengers overseas
because it's deemed they shouldn't be coming, so better to deal with them offshore,
not onshore. Uh, he- uh, uh,
health, health officials, um, the Minister mentioned the
measles global outbreak. Uh, as you've
seen, there is a me- there is messaging on the NZTD, but we have already
been helping Health with contact tracing, which sort of brought back memories,
not... You know. Uh, but you know, we
learned- (laughs)
Slightly.
Um, but the, you know, point is, we learned a lot through the global pandemic,
which we have tried very hard to build into the NZTD and take forward.
So, you know, it has proven to be a really useful tool.
Um, and actually, not so recently, but when there was a foot and mouth outbreak in
Indonesia not so long ago, again, you know, it means the M- MPI have got
a s- a fair idea of who's coming in, who has been in
Indonesia, and we need to take extra steps and precautions with them.
So, you know, it really has been an excellent tool.
Um, I mean, just, there are so many other things.
Uh, so things you think that shouldn't be hard and turn out to be hard.
Um, we opened... Well, Hamilton and, um, Dunedin airports
reopened this, over the last year.
That was a massive amount of work, and you wouldn't necessarily think so, but it's,
it's huge, and I think they were surprised at quite how,
uh, many things you have to do in order to get an international airport operating.
So, that was a very big piece of cross-border work.
Um, the work we do every year on our fee structures,
you know, no one likes paying fees, and I think we've worked really hard as a, as a
border sector to, uh, ensure that we are consulting
well with people like airlines and airports, uh, cruise, the cruise
industry, so that they're aware of what's coming.
Uh, we work very hard on the transparency of our costs together, so I think
that's been work I'm proud of. Um,
gosh, what else? Um,
oh, well, we've got work coming up, so, uh, Bledisloe Terminal, so
again, um, border agencies working together with the Port of
Auckland on that sort of thing. Um, I'm sure I'm forgetting plenty of things that
we've all worked on.
Thank you.
So-
Thanks a lot.
... that does sort of say, but it really, you know, the chief
executives really have leaned in, uh, and it's been, uh, uh, you know,
a, a, a good, good bit of joint work.
So, what can the new group learn? Well, we have a number of the same people
coming across.
Right.
So, uh, I, I feel pretty confident that we will continue to work well too-
Actually, the other thing I was going to mention is, we are coming into the very
busiest time of year. Summer for us is enormously busy.
It's busy in terms of, um, exports, of course, with all
our, you know, very good primary product, products going overseas,
uh, businesses here bringing in Christmas, seasonal,
um, merchandise. Uh, it's the peak period for cruise ships, it's the
peak period for air travelers. So, all of us know this is the very busiest
patch, and we do a lot of planning, again, with airports,
seaports, and industry to make sure we are really well set up
for that. Um, and I think generally speaking, you know, we do together a
very good job.
Thank you. All right, next question, Tim Costley.
Thank you. Um, I'd just like to sort of continue on the conversation
about the border processing for, for visitors in particular
and the digital border. I certainly agree with the comments that between
yourselves and MPI and the Biosecurity, like it's the, the best border
experience, um, I've probably ever had now.
So, I, I just want to commend you for that.
Can I, um, ask about cruise ships though?
'Cause you've made a few references to that, and I think when we spoke maybe a
couple of years ago, um, I understood that visitors
on cruise ships...... had to process each time they came
ashore. Is that correct, or is it just once for their time in New Zealand?
The first port of arrival, so the very first port the ship comes into, we
process everybody then,
and that's it. So-
So, there's no barriers to then that ship visiting any other port in-
No,
not at all. ... New Zealand, based on the need for customs or any other kind of support?
Absolutely not, no. Just once, first time.
A- and has that always been the case?
Yes, I think so.
Yep. Fantastic. Okay. It was- it was- it was- it wa- the question came from
another port that, um-
Mm-hmm.
... someone thought they- they had access about cust- you know, needing custom
support to get something to their port, but thank
you.
So, picking up on that then, do they have to
process through
from a biosecurity per- perspective each time, though?
Not that I'm aware of.
No?
Again, first port of arrival is where we and MPI process
passengers. I'll have to be corrected.
So, they kind of get-
That's
correct. ... back on the ship and then get off somewhere else
Yeah.
Yes. So- so if you say-
... different from that ship. ... if you arrive in Auckland, which is, you know, a lot of people's experience, we
will process you the first time. You do your NZTD, you do it digitally, just as you
do for if you're an air passenger.
Yeah.
Uh, we have officers waiting at the- at the port when, uh, that ship comes
in, as do MPI. And because we've had advance notice of who's
coming, we figure out who we would like to talk to.
Actually, increasingly these days, the cruise ship will,
um, give us actually some space on board, you know, a lounge or something, and
the passengers can go there. We will interact with them.
It's a better experience for them, it's good for the officers.
That doesn't always happen. Sometimes, uh, we do deal with them on the
wharf. We don't have anywhere in New Zealand which has dedicated cruise
facilities, so we do have to s- literally take suitcases
full of equipment down to the- down to the, um, Princess Wharf or whatever in
Auckland, unpack our laptops and passport scanners and things.
So, you know, it's quite a- quite a, uh, manual process in that respect.
But MPI officers are there too. They all have X-ray equipment if they
think they need it. And, you know, really, we process people pretty
quickly. The majority of passengers don't have any particular interaction
with us, because we know who's coming and we know who we do want to speak
to.
So sorry, if-
Oh, so if you've got someone come to
Auckland- ... that- if that cruise ship then goes to another location-
Yes, that's fine,
... with the same passengers, they don't have to go through any process?
No.
Okay.
Absolutely not.
So, how do you stop them then just having left their bag on the ship
for the first time, but then take their bag off the second time?
That's a possibility.
All right.
Yeah, the-
So, it's no checks?
... law- the law requires them to declare first time, so the New
Zealand Traveler Declaration says I'm supposed to make that declaration, so it
would be an offense if they failed to declare their bag.
How many have declared illegal drugs?
Oh. (laughs)
(laughs)
Usually nobody declares the illegal drugs.
But- but, uh- but they- they might medicines and other kind of things that we'd
like
to remove. Sure, but I guess my point is they could easily then take all the illegal stuff off
at the second point of
We- we may have information intelligence or- or we'd apply the same
checks to a cruise line passenger as we would to a-
Air passenger.
... air passenger.
And that's always been the system?
No, it hasn't actually. So, this is- it is considerably tighter
since we've had the New Zealand Traveler Declaration, because, um, we used
to, uh, only... Uh, there was a- there's a...
You can correct me, this- the Immigration Act allowed passengers on cruise ships to
be in New Zealand for, I think, 20 days, and they didn't actually have to
immigrate into New Zealand.
Mm-hmm.
And when we introduced the NZTD, I thought this was ridiculous.
We should know who's coming and they should...
The only re- the only time we would process them as coming into New Zealand is if
they were disembarking from the cruise ship permanently.
Yeah.
So now, no. 100% of, uh, passengers and crew have to
complete an NZTD, so we know exactly who's- who's here
and...
So then, I- I get it's a biosecurity issue primarily, but obviously we've got an
issue in Auckland at the moment-
Yes. ... with hornets, and cruise ships could potentially be a mechanism
for-
Mm-hmm. ... those getting into the country.
So, what sort of work is done to minimize that risk, particularly in a
scenario where there's no checks at subsequent ports such that food could be taken
off a vessel that came from a- an international location?
So, this is really a biosecurity question, so I'm happy to-
I get
it, but- ... have it bit to... go either way.
But I feel it's something that, uh-
Yeah.
... Rose- Rose Smith should really be answering.
(laughs) Yeah.
But, uh, but again, um, passengers, as you will recall from the form, have to
declare if they're bringing any food.
But MPI also, um, accredits, uh, the ships and the cruise
industry. Uh, they work very closely with them on the food that is on board those
cruise ships. They audit them, uh, they are very vigilant.
And the cruise industry knows extremely well what they may and may not do with
that food. So, um, y- there- there is a
comprehensive work program that MPI Biosecurity does keep an eye out
cruise ships.
Okay. With the NZTD, um,
why is it, in your view, that all the cruise passengers do
it, but the airline passengers are not yet? Is it an information thing?
Is it a speed? They have more time?
It's- it's I think all of those things.
I think, um, increasingly on cruise ships-
... passengers do a lot of the things they do digitally, you know.
Mm-hmm.
They- they can shop and order meals and so forth.
So, this is just part of that digital package.
The cruise industry absolutely has promoted it very vigorously, because
actually they realize it's a better passenger experience at the- at- when you get
to Auckland or Tauron or wherever, that if passengers are dumped and there's
nothing to be seen, they just get cleared through immediately.
Um, I think- I think
you've also got people coming across the Tasman for three or four days.
They have time to do it. And the Wi-Fi on cruise ships is very good these days.
Mm-hmm.
That is not always I find, when I'm traveling, the case on airplanes.
If you have the app loaded, you'll probably be fine.
But if you're trying to load the app from nothing-
Mm-hmm.
... it can be a bit sketchy.
And so, is there work going into promoting that NZTD
in the point of departure?
Yes. Um, again, I'm painful about this, but everywhere I go-
(laughs)
... I look. There are other posters up.
Yeah.
Everyone builds these up. Yeah, so-
So obviously, good compliance from Australia at 75%.
Yes, it's excellent.
A- anywhere else that's better than that?
No, they're-
It's the
top. ... they're leading the pack, I'm sorry to say.
I hate your Australians beating us-
(laughs)
... but it's such a case of (inaudible) (laughs)
Uh, Francisco Hernandez.
Uh, thank you, Chair. Um, I'm curious, uh, on one of the things that you
said in your opening statement around how, um,
reopening the, um, international
travel at Dunedin Airport has proven, um, harder than expected.
Uh, can you elaborate that for, um, I guess, people in Dunedin who
are watching this?
Uh, there is a lot to, um, running an
international airport, and, uh, it- it's the place where
New Zealand exerts its sovereignty.
You know, it is the place where we say, "Yes, you can come into New Zealand or
you cannot. Yes, you can bring that into New Zealand, or you cannot."
Um, there are a lot of things, uh, where you- you have to be sure
that passengers leaving
are not leaving with explosives or they're dangerous goods in their
baggage. So, there's all of that sort of screening which has to be done to
international standards. Um,
we all have pretty digital systems.
The last time Dunedin Airport ran, we had...
we were much less digital than we are now.
And so, for example, uh, I was talking to Daniel de Bono, the chief executive, you
know, we had to put in a server room, which was not something we had had in the
past.
Okay.
Um, so it's... Uh, we have
to, uh, assert that the airport meets our
customs requirements to be a customs-controlled area.
The MPI has to do the same for biosecurity purposes.
Civil Aviation Authority has to do the same in terms of their- their
legislation. So, there's quite a lot to
it.
Yeah, sure. So, it- it didn't really matter that it was only going to and from one
destination-
No.
... because all the upfront costs are the same either way?
That's right.
Okay.
A- and really these days
some destinations are probably riskier...
well, are riskier than others, but, you know,
uh,
you- you can't be less vigilant just because you think Dunedin's
only dealing with, um, Australia.
Yeah, sure.
So, both those locations, Dunedin and the Waikato out there have now been
operating-
Yes.
... for nearly six months. Any challenges or issues that have arisen through that
period?
I have to say, I think it's been really remarkably smooth. Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm.
And to- to be honest, it- it's... I
encourage, um, more aviation c- connectivity.
I think it's incredibly important for New Zealand, but it is tricky for us
because we don't have any other presence in Hamilton.
So I... Uh, we have to bring staff down from Auckland to do
the processing and in Dunedin, uh, Dunedin's very much a maritime and
excise port, so we have to have staff who are trained to do both maritime and
aviation. So, you know, it's- it's a...
it's a slightly trickier, um, staffing models and we
operate-
Mm-hmm.
... in places with large airports.
But that's fine. I mean, I think we're doing a very good job.
Our relationships with the airports is good, yeah.
How much would they have to increase their scheduling before you made the call
around locating staff there or is that,
uh...
Uh, oh sorry. Well, the thing with Hamilton is, um, mm, I'm reluctant to...
Uh, what I like about Auckland staff going down there is they are used to
dealing... uh, uh, working in a very busy airport with regrettably a
lot of drug couriers and things coming in. So, they're very alert to risk.
My worry slightly that if you're working in a, um, slightly less
busy airport, you know, you may become a little more relaxed.
Uh, Dunedin, uh, the team there, no, I think they're...
they're doing a good job and as I say, they do maritime activity as well.
So, they're very, very attuned to-
Mm-hmm.
... um, sort of risks that incoming aircraft and people bring.
It's very easy to travel between Hamilton and Auckland with-
Yes, it's-
... a great experience.
... it's this way.
Okay, next question.
(laughs)
Yeah, it's this way, so, yeah.
Can you just clarify why, um, expenditure for the border executive
board was under budget by about 36% this financial year?
And what savings do you expect you would get from
disestablishing the board?
Uh, well, we... I think we ran very efficiently to be honest.
Um-
Well, right?
So, we had funding for- for, uh, eight staff.
We had-
Mm-hmm.
... um, a mixture of, um, uh, fixed term and permanent staff, but only
six out of maximum, so we had some salary savings.
Uh, we had a budget for some consultancy, but along with
any other part of government at the moment, we are r- required to reduce our
consultancy spend. So, those are the main things.
What savings will we make? Uh, under the new model, we'll operate with
three staff, so there'll be
savings there and we'll have a considerably reduced consultancy rate.
Okay.
Thank you.
Very good. All right. Any further questions from members?
Wonderful. All right, I think that's us.
Thank you again for your time this afternoon.
And can I also send my thanks to your broader team.
It is an incredible job they do day in, day out, challenging
circumstances, uh, and we all very much appreciate it.
Thank you.
Thank
you. Thank you for watching.
(clapping) All right, that brings an
end to the live session for
today.